Epstein-Barr Virus, or EBV for short,
is a member of the herpesvirus family.
Most people are infected with
EBV at some point.
In childhood, these infections often cause no symptoms.
In adults, EBV has been implicated
in numerous autoimmune diseases and cancer.
Up to half the EBV infections
that occur during adolescence or
early adulthood cause infectious mononucleosis,
sometimes called mono.
Mono is spread primarily through saliva.
A person can also spread it
by coughing or sneezing,
spreading droplets of infected saliva or mucus,
which others can inhale.
The virus enters cells in the area of the
upper throat that lies behind the nose,
called the nasopharynx.
It takes over the host cell’s nuclear material
to replicate more viral particles.
These particles are released and spread
to other parts of the body,
and into the bloodstream,
where they infect immune cells
called B-lymphocytes.
Inside the B cells,
the viral genome changes shape.
It persists in an inactive state
and is passed on to new B cells.
It also protects the invaded cell
from chemicals released by T cells,
while healthy B cells are destroyed.